# 💪 The Spartan Protocol Homepage

```
          />_________S_P_A_R_T_A_N_://_________
 [########[]___________________________________>
          \>        Established 650 BC.
```

spartan:// is a client-to-server protocol designed for hobbyists. Spartan draws on ideas from gemini, gopher, and http to create something new, yet familiar. It strives to be simple, fun, and inspiring.

Spartan sends ASCII-encoded, plaintext requests over TCP. Arbitrary text and binary files are supported for both upload and download. Like gemini, the default hypertext document in spartan is text/gemini. A special line type ("=:") is used to prompt for input. Spartan has four status codes: "success", "redirect", "server error", and "client error".

Spartan is not opinionated about how or what you use it for, only that you have fun doing so!

=> specification.gmi spartan protocol - specification
=> design-goals.gmi spartan protocol - design goals
=> examples.gmi spartan protocol - examples
=> spartan_server.py spartan protocol - reference server
=> spartan_client.py spartan protocol - reference client

Comparison: gemini:// vs. spartan://

```
                       gemini       spartan
                       ------       -------
transport              TCP + TLS    TCP
request structure      full URL     hostname & path
request encoding       utf-8        us-ascii
status codes           18           4
document type          text/gemini  text/gemini
input prompt           1x status    "=:" prompt line

data upload            limited      yes
mimetypes              yes          yes
virtual hosting        yes          yes
same-site redirects    yes          yes
cross-site redirects   yes          no
proxy requests         yes          no
"lang" parameter       yes          no
```

Dive in!
=> spartan://mozz.us

For inquiries, contact michael@mozz.us
